Like the voice of God just said,
I'm Deric Horn,
the Application Frameworks Evangelist,
and what that really means to you is
if you ever run into blocking issues
or need help escalating a problem,
you can always email me.
You'll see my email at the
end of the presentation.
It's just deric at apple.com.
But I'm glad you're all here.
This is really important stuff
that you really need to know,
and it's not that hard to learn.
So I think that you're going to
find that with a small investment,
you'll get a big return.
So before I get started,
I'd like to ask a couple questions,
though.
I'd like to know how many of you
are currently using Xcode for your
primary development environment?
Excellent.
Everyone's universal.
And how many of you are currently
writing Cocoa Objective-C code?
All right, a couple.
And how many of you are planning on
writing Cocoa and Objective-C code
in the next six months?
Excellent.
Well, you guys came to the right place.
So I'm a lot like you guys.
I've got a long history and
a big investment in Carbon.
But you'll see that Cocoa has
some incredibly enticing features.
So everything I talk about today is
going to be from the Carbon perspective,
perspective of a Carbon developer.
So this is quite a broad
subject to cover in one hour,
so I'm going to take what I kind
of call a shotgun approach.
I'm going to cover a little
bit about a broad area.
And I'm going to have to
make some assumptions.
I'm going to have to assume that
you're aware of object-oriented
design and I'm going to have to assume
that you drank as much coffee as me,
because I'm going to have to talk
fast to get through all this stuff.
We'll start by going over
an overview of Cocoa,
some of the Cocoa design philosophy,
how to get things done in Cocoa.
Then we'll talk a little bit about
how to get started with Objective-C.
What you need to know
to get started in Cocoa.
Some tips and tricks that I've
picked up along the way that will
hopefully save you time and effort.
And then I'm going to talk
about migration strategies.
So given the current
state of your application,
how do you bring that forward
into adopting some of these
killer new Mac OS X technologies
that are Objective-C based?
We put together about five
different demos for this.
They're all what I call,
they all make use of what
I call low-hanging Cocoa fruit.
So they're things that you get a
big bang for with little effort.
And I'll go ahead and demo those two.
And then we're going to
have one of your own,
third-party developer, Scott Thompson,
come up on stage.
And Scott was one of the
people responsible for taking
what was a large-scale,
legacy,
Windows-only application and then putting
a Cocoa front-end on that and turning
it into a cross-platform application.
So you'll get to hear some of
his experiences in doing that.
And we'll try and leave some
time for Q&A afterwards.
So regardless of what framework,
language, or development environment
you're writing for,
all successful applications have to
follow the same simple guidelines.
We want to solve a problem
for our customers quickly.
We start with the target
customer and a great idea.
So regardless of, for instance,
if we're writing maybe a
ringtone editor for a cell phone
or perhaps like a high-end,
vertical market,
expensive application that's going
to process and analyze MRI scans,
we want to follow these
same simple guidelines.
You design for Aqua and Mac OS X,
keep your UI simple,
maybe then we let some people test it,
iterate on that UI,
different prototyping of our UI,
adopt other killer technologies,
so whether that's maybe core
audio on one side or core image
or core video on the other.
and then we want to deliver
something of high production value,
something which differentiates our
application from that of our competitors.
Well, Cocoa was designed with
all these goals in mind.
In fact, I think when you look
at Cocoa applications,
they have a reputation
for having a clean,
crisp user interface and
application behaviors which we
and our users come to demand,
things like cut, copy, paste, undo, redo,
scriptability, accessibility,
and a whole lot more.
So Carbon started out
as just a porting layer,
but since that time,
it's turned into a whole lot more.
So let's go ahead and see what
a modern Carbon application is.
I'm glad to see that all of you have
already compiled your applications
for Universal and are on Xcode.
Modern Carbon applications lay out their
user interfaces with Interface Builder.
Should be using core
foundation for the base types,
things like CFStrings to
abstract Unicode,
CFArrays.
So you should all be
familiar with the retain,
release, reference counting
memory management models.
Carbon uses procedural-based
APIs to interact with the system.
It's probably been drilled
into you pretty good by now.
It shouldn't be using Quick Draw and
should have adopted vector-based
drawing in the way of Quartz.
and we use Carbon Events as a
method for overriding default system
behavior and as our event model.
And we use HIViews and
composited Windows,
as well as modern
applications are bundled,
so we keep our localizations
in Lproj folders,
images specific to our application
in the resources subdirectory,
an Info.plist which
describes our application.
And we shouldn't be using
any deprecated APIs,
right?
So let's take that evolution one step
further and take a look at Cocoa.
Well,
Cocoa applications are also universal,
also lay out their
UI in Interface Builder.
Cocoa applications rely on
foundation for the base types.
And through toll-free bridging,
we can simply cast things
like NSStrings to CFStrings,
or CFArrays to NSArrays.
The big difference between Carbon and
Cocoa is that Cocoa uses object-oriented
APIs when interacting with the system.
Cocoa uses things like NSImage,
NSBezierPath for their graphics model.
NSImage and NSBezierPath
simply lie on top of Quartz.
And Cocoa uses delegates and
notifications as its event
model and method for overriding
default system behavior.
Later on in the session,
I'm going to go over an example
comparing Carbon events to delegates.
and Cocoa Applications will use NSViews,
which are really very similar to HIViews.
Cocoa Applications are also bundled and
also should be using deprecated APIs.
So hopefully by looking
at these two lists,
you realize that you probably know a lot
more about Cocoa development than you
thought and definitely more than someone
that's coming new to the platform.
Well, I felt obligated to throw in at
least one architecture diagram here.
So we have our typical
Darwin-Kernel graphics,
the two application frameworks
which we're interested in,
Carbon and Cocoa, and Aqua above that.
But in reality, over time,
Carbon and Cocoa have been
using more and more code,
more and more similar code.
I mean, we access files,
and the resource works of
those files the same way.
Our Carbon and Cocoa applications
get launched the same ways.
Our icons are the same,
so we use the same artwork.
Now we're introducing
things like core text.
So over time,
we've had this core services layer,
which has been growing and growing.
And this is a common API set that's
common to both Carbon and Cocoa.
So in reality,
the architecture diagram looks
a little bit closer to this.
So what is Cocoa?
Well,
it's the most advanced framework ever.
I got this email a few
weeks ago and it reads,
"I finally quit MetroWorks this
year and have moved on to Aspire.
I've been learning Cocoa and
to my great surprise,
I love it." This was sent
to me by Joseph Wankerl.
A lot of you may already know him.
He used to work at MetroWorks.
But when I read this,
this really means a lot.
I mean, here we have a long-time Carbon,
Power Plant,
and MetroWorks developer who just
started learning Cocoa and he loves it.
And I think this is a common
sentiment among a lot of developers
who start picking Cocoa up.
So let's dig a little bit deeper.
One of the really neat things
about Cocoa is that we use a few
concepts pervasively throughout
the entire Objective-C frameworks.
So a lot of time you hear
analogies of Cocoa being
compared to things like LEGOs.
And it's really kind of true in that
because we use these same conventions
throughout all of the frameworks,
we can start to adopt new
technologies without really having
to know too much about them,
without having to be experts.
So for instance,
if I want to add something
like speech to my application,
I can make a pretty good guess that
I'm going to have to allocate and
initialize some speech object and
then start sending it messages.
and I can be rest assured that the
experts that know everything about
speech have already implemented the
default behavior back in Cupertino.
Now, if I want to start overriding
the default behavior,
that's when I have to start
reading up on the material and
becoming an expert on myself.
So Cocoa is a full-featured
application framework,
so it contains advanced controls,
things like NSTextView, NSOutlineView,
the WebKitView.
The WebKitView is really almost
a full web browser packaged
down into a single view.
Application behaviors, as I mentioned.
You get a lot of this for free
or with really little code,
so things like cut, copy, paste, undo,
redo, scriptability, accessibility.
And in 10.4,
we announced the serialization of your
entire object graph through Core Data.
And then just on Monday,
we introduced Core Animation and
Animation Kit.
In general, Cocoa will handle all these
default behaviors for you and
allow you to build more consistent
applications and also allowing you
to focus on the core of your code,
so the intellectual property
that you're interested in.
Another neat thing about Cocoa is
that it is a rapid application
development environment,
so you can quickly prototype new UIs.
You develop your UI,
you can go ahead and change it without
really having to write little code.
Interface Builder becomes much
more powerful when dealing
with Cocoa applications.
I'll show you a demo of this later.
But not only is it a great prototyping
tool for rapid application development,
it's a full-featured,
rich application development environment
that will let you ship large-scale,
shrink-wrapped applications.
So why use Cocoa?
Well, you get these well-integrated
system behaviors for free.
And really what I mean by that is,
for instance,
when I work on a Cocoa application,
I almost think of it like I have a whole
team of Apple engineers working with me.
So I'm concentrating on the
core of my application code,
and this team of engineers is back
in Cupertino making sure that all my
Mac OS X specific code is handled for me.
So when we moved to
different architectures,
from PowerPC to Intel,
I can be confident in knowing that
my team of engineers back at Apple is
handling all of these Indian issues,
byte swapping issues for me.
When we announced things
like resolution independence,
I don't have to be so concerned
about what the difference is
between pixels and points,
upgrading my art to high resolution art.
I know this team of engineers
is on top of this issue,
handling all this for me,
and I can concentrate
on the core of my code.
It's developed with Mac OS X.
What I mean by this is Cocoa is
actually part of the operating system.
So as we introduce new features,
those APIs and those features
are introduced through Cocoa.
So in the past, when we introduced new
technologies at Apple,
there was always this lag time
between the time when we introduced
this technology and then the time
between we would see the APIs appear
in frameworks such as PowerPlant.
It integrates well
with development tools,
so I'm sure that you're
all aware of this.
I mean, a lot of you know that Interface
Builder behaves a lot better with
Objective-C and Cocoa-based code,
and then from the announcement on
Monday at the tools state of the union,
I think some of you may have
seen the code refactoring,
and this is truly amazing.
We lay out our class.
One of the things that he did was just
change the name of his instance variable,
and then it will go ahead and pervasively
change the name of my instance
variable throughout all my code,
but it doesn't stop there.
It goes ahead and changes the names
of all my getters and setters,
and not only that, it will actually look
inside my nib files,
and references to that instance variable
get changed inside my nib files,
too.
And you only get this tight integration
with Objective-C and Cocoa code.
So we've spent many years and
millions of man hours developing
what we think is a rich,
full-featured framework in Cocoa.
We are dedicated to supporting
Cocoa into the future,
and I think everyone can realize that.
And probably the biggest reason
why you're all here today is
the ability to easily integrate
our latest killer technologies.
Things like Core Data, Sync Services,
Quartz Composer,
Instant Message Framework, WebKit,
Core Image, QtKit, Address Book, PDFKit,
Bluetooth, and there's a whole lot more.
I mean, we have .Mac, animation,
and so forth.
One of the big directions of Carbon in
Leopard is better integration with Cocoa.
So to give an example of that,
everyone knows Quickdraw was
deprecated and now with 64-bit it's
completely removed and unsupported.
Well, what kind of fell off of that
was named cursor support,
for instance.
Named cursor support was
reliant on Quickdraw.
So then the question comes up,
what kind of API are we going to provide
to replace the named cursor support API?
So the first thing we do is take a
look to see what NSCursor has to offer.
Well, it turns out NSCursor is already
64-bit clean and has all the
functionality that we need.
So the next question comes up,
do we write a Carbon API around
NSCursor or do we ask Carbon developers
to call NSCursor directly?
Well, a common theme over the last couple
WWDCs has been that we are going
to produce a great technology and
API set that goes along with that.
We're not going to be in the
business of creating great
technology and then releasing two
APIs and supporting those two APIs.
So the decision was made to go ahead
and ask Carbon Developers to go
ahead and call NS Cursor directly.
So, Cocoa design.
As you know, Cocoa is object-oriented,
so you're going to have to
become familiar with those
object-oriented paradigms,
things like subclassing, delegation,
inheritance, sending messages to objects,
or as we think in C++,
maybe invoking methods.
Cocoa is based on a
model-view-controller design.
So I think most of you
understand what that is.
When we lay out our user interface
as the view and our model
proprietary data underneath is the
model and we provide controller
classes which mitigate the data and
information flowing between the two.
And this is a great design pattern.
It leads heavily towards portability,
maintainability, and so forth.
When you design for the MVC model,
you should just always ask yourself,
from the user's perspective,
how does the user interact with my data?
And likewise,
from the application perspective,
how do I manage the data from
the model-controller side?
When Scott comes up,
he's going to talk into a little bit
more detail about how he was able to take
advantage of the model-view-controller
in bringing Mindjet over to the Mac.
Excuse me, Mind Manager.
So how do you get started with Cocoa?
Well, first step,
move your code to Xcode.
I'm glad I think
everybody's hand was raised.
We've already done that.
And the next step is to learn the
differences in Interface Builder.
So let's take a look at that right now.
So when we lay out our user interface,
here's a sample Carbon user interface,
my registration dialog.
I'll go ahead and lay out
my user interface until
it's just the way I like it.
Then typically,
we'll take a step back and
take a look and we'll see which
fields do we have to access.
In this case, we're going to access
our editable text field.
So typically,
we'll assign it a signature and an ID.
And then we'll go ahead and get
that through the get control by ID.
And then again,
we'll go ahead and see which
actions we need to take.
So in this case,
when the user clicks the OK button,
we'll want to assign it a command
to take some sort of action.
Then we'll go ahead and parse that
command through our Carbon Event Handler,
nest it in there.
We'll check to see what
kind of a command it is.
And finally,
we'll call a routine in our model class
called Validate Registration here.
Now let's go ahead and see how we
do the exact same thing in Cocoa.
So I tried to lay out the
user interface the same way.
One of the first things that
you're going to notice here is
that cube on the lower right,
and it's called Registration Controller.
That cube actually represents an instance
of my Registration Controller class,
my own class.
From that point on, we can then drag
connections into our class.
So in order to gain a reference
to the EditableText field,
we simply drag a connection between
our Registration Controller and
our EditableText field.
And then we'll go ahead and
name it RegistrationCode.
So now we actually have an
instance variable set up within
our RegistrationController class,
which references that control directly.
It's quite easy.
Then again,
we'll go ahead and take a step
back and see which actions we're
going to need to take back,
we're going to need to set up.
So again,
we're going to want to set the OK button.
So we'll go ahead and drag a
connection from the OK button to
our Registration Controller class,
and we'll assign it a name,
Validate Registration.
So after we've done all this,
we've got a small class now
called Registration Controller.
When the user clicks OK,
it will call our Validate
Registration method directly,
and from that method,
we can access our instance variable,
registration code.
There's really no code
to be written here.
So Cocoa is not a separate box.
It's not isolated in its own environment.
That kind of reminds me of a story.
I go to the Silicon Valley Cocoa Heads
meetings when I can,
and a while ago,
maybe about a month or two ago,
I met the Yahoo Messenger for
the Mac engineers,
and then again about three weeks later,
I think this was about the day after they
had released their 3.0 for the Mac beta,
I saw Carl, one of the engineers,
eating lunch on our campus.
So I asked him if he
wrote the client in Cocoa,
and he said, yeah, mostly.
So I asked him what he meant by mostly,
and he said, well,
we share this large C++ source base
between our Mac and our Windows client.
Well, in my mind,
this is a Cocoa application.
I mean,
this is a typical way of writing a
cross-platform Cocoa application.
You provide your view and
your controller classes,
which interact with the operating system,
and then you have your proprietary
C++ model code underneath.
and Scott are the first to introduce the
new Carbon and Objective-C framework.
Cocoa can easily interact with
other subsystems like Carbon,
BSD, and Quartz.
With Objective-C++,
you can easily mix and match C, C++,
and Objective-C all in the same file.
Scott, again,
is going to talk a little bit
more into detail of how he was
able to take advantage of that.
So the next step is to learn Objective-C.
So if I were to take a typical source
file and hand it to a Carbon developer,
Carbon developer will typically
look at it and ignore everything
in those crazy square brackets.
If I were to take that same
source file and then hand
it off to a Cocoa developer,
Cocoa developer is probably going
to ignore everything that isn't
in those crazy square brackets.
Well, it's really not that bad.
We have a great document online called
the Objective-C Programming Language,
and I promise within a few hours,
a day at the most,
you will understand enough
Objective-C to get yourself started.
But you should also know that
Cocoa applications can be
written in other languages.
So we actually have a session on
Friday morning which talks about writing
Cocoa applications in Ruby and Python.
But you should know that any
interpreted language is always
going to suffer performance
problems over a compiled language.
So let's take a closer
look at Objective-C.
Here's a typical C function call.
Set sticky note dimensions.
We're going to pass in a
pointer to my sticky note,
some dimensions, and a Boolean.
Maybe this is to make it visible.
I'm not sure.
Well, let's take a look and see how we
write the same thing in Cocoa.
We'll start off with the brackets.
And then we'll set up our
object so the object can kind
of be compared to our pointer.
and then we'll go ahead
and set up the arguments.
So this is actually,
we're going to send the object,
my sticky note,
the message to set the width to 50,
height to 100,
and to animate the transition.
So by looking at this,
you can tell that this is
actually much more readable.
I think this is almost self-documenting.
Maybe you can get rid of your comments.
Let's take a look at another example.
So here we have some embedded brackets.
So probably from the last slide,
you've already learned
enough Objective-C to tell
what this is going to do.
We're going to start from the inside
brackets and take the color of our
last sticky note and assign that to the
current color of our current sticky note.
But actually,
this is kind of interesting.
Just by looking at this one line of code,
I can tell quite a bit about what
the class actually looks like.
So let's take a look.
Virtually all classes in Cocoa are
in one way or another derived from
the powerful base class NSObject.
So NSObject provides, among other things,
things like the reference counting
retain-release memory management model,
and, of course, with Objective-C 2.0,
if you're targeting Leopard,
you can use the garbage collection.
But we can have a good idea that we've
got an instance variable named color.
Now in Carbon, for instance,
our getters and setters are
typically named things like
getControlValue and setControlValue.
In Cocoa,
things are done a little bit differently.
Our getter is named the exact same
thing as our instance variable.
So color would be the name of
our method to get the color.
And setColor is our setter.
Small s, set, capital C for the color.
Now it's very important that you follow
these coding conventions set up by
Cocoa rather than taking all the coding
conventions that you've developed over
the years and pushing those into Cocoa.
Reason being, a lot of conventions are
built on top of this.
So, for instance, in Cocoa,
we have concepts of key-value
coding and key-value observing.
Key-value observing allows you
to watch an instance variable,
and when the instance variable changes,
we can take some action.
And then on top of key-value
coding and key-value observing,
we build bindings on top of that.
So if you start to break down
the low-level conventions
like the getters and setters,
the rest of those conventions
are going to go out the door.
So here, let's take a look at comparing
Carbon events to delegates.
So here we have part of a
function to constrain a window
to only grow it horizontally,
not vertically.
So typically what we'll do is
we'll install a Carbon event
handler on a window,
take a look at the k event
bounds changing Carbon event.
Then from within our routine here,
we'll go ahead and get the
rectangle of our previous window,
pull out the rectangle
of our current window.
change the rectangle so that the
current Windows rectangle matches
the previous window rectangle,
maybe then we'll call size window
and return no error or course
those parameters back in and
return back event not handled.
We go ahead and write this code.
Send it out for testing.
Everything seems to work fine.
Okay.
We think we got it.
All of a sudden we hit the Zoom box.
Boom!
Takes up the whole screen again.
Okay.
Not a big problem.
We'll go back, look at the code,
try to add the clause in
there to handle the Zoom.
We think we got it now.
At least I think those are all the cases.
I'm pretty sure anyway.
Those are all the cases I wrote in here.
But let's take a look and see how
we do the same thing in Cocoa.
So Cocoa has this concept of delegates.
Delegates allow one object to receive
messages from another object to override.
So typically we'll use
delegates to override commonly
overridden system functionality.
Let me try and describe
that a little bit better.
Here again,
we have an app controller class.
If you look at small samples
on the web or tutorials,
they'll typically name their
controller class app controller,
so I did the same thing in this case.
What we want to do is make
our app controller class
a delegate of our window.
So from Interface Builder,
we'll simply drag a connection from
our window to the app controller
and assign it as our delegate.
Then through dynamic binding,
the NSWindowController is going to say,
app controller,
do you respond to the message,
window will resize?
And if we do, it'll call us.
And it's really just one line of code.
We go ahead and set the
height of our window to match
what the height used to be,
and then we return that size.
So there's really very little
room to make any errors here.
So here are a few tips and tricks
that I've picked up along the way.
So perhaps you have a large source base.
You've got hundreds, maybe thousands,
of source files in there.
Maybe you're compiling
in open source projects.
Well, you may not have the patience or
the ability to go through there
and rename all of your source files
to end in a .m or .mm extension
if you're doing Objective-C++.
So what we do offer is a build setting.
It's the compile sources
as build setting.
This will allow you to put
Objective-C code directly into
your .c files and it will invoke
the Objective-C flavor of the
compiler when compiling your files.
Now, if you run into errors in this case,
for instance, if you're using keywords
used by Objective-C,
there's another option.
You can do this on a file-by-file basis.
So here we can do a get info,
in this case, a get info on main.c,
and we can coerce its file
type to be sourcecode.c.objc.
It's a great tip.
Next one, CodeSense.
So I'm sure most of you
are already using this.
This is code completion.
Objective-C is really the easy
part when you're adopting Cocoa.
The hard part is you're being faced
with literally thousands of new APIs.
But the good news is that because
of the code conventions used,
after a while you can start to
guess and understand what the
APIs are going to be named.
So before you start looking
through the header files or
looking through the documentation,
you might start taking some guesses.
So here I want to maybe create a subview.
No, I want to add a subview.
Yep, there it is.
You guessed right.
Add a subview.
Hit return.
It puts it in there.
And then just like Carbon,
you use control slash to advance the
highlight from one argument to the next.
So after you've got the basics,
I recommend that you start learning the
more intermediate to advanced topics.
Things like key value coding,
key value observing,
as I mentioned earlier,
and then bindings on top of that.
So let's talk about migration strategies.
Which framework is right for me?
Well, both Carbon and Cocoa are able to
create 64-bit universal binaries.
So why not take advantage of both?
You can go for a gradual
adoption strategy.
So I remember when
Mac OS X first came out,
some developers decided to maybe create
their next window using Carbon Events.
And the way they would do
that is encapsulate all their
code for creating the window,
installing the event handlers,
and handling the events
all within one file.
Right?
After they began to become familiar with
Carbon Events and began to like them
and understand how elegant they were,
they start to move these
changes pervasively through
the rest of the source space.
Slowly, you bump up the sleep
time on wait next event.
After you feel comfortable,
you change wait next event to
run application event loop,
and you're off.
You can kind of adopt the same strategy
when looking at Objective-C and Cocoa.
You can start by adopting
something like a Cocoa service,
such as the font panel, color picker,
or spelling panel.
or with Leopard,
you can now embed an NS view directly
into your Carbon application.
Or you may choose to make your
next window a Cocoa window.
So let's look at some tips and tricks
when dealing with a hybrid application.
The first one,
you have to start including
NSApplicationLoad.
Just get used to it.
Otherwise, you're going to see bugs and
beat yourself up about it.
So get used to including
NSApplicationLoad.
Calling it multiple
times simply is benign.
It'll simply check to see if the
NSApp variable has been initialized,
and if it has, it'll return.
Another tip is that Interface
Builder 2 can actually read and
write your controller files.
So one of the really neat things is,
from Interface Builder,
after you've dragged all
these connections around,
set up all your instance
variables and method names,
you can actually go to the
Classes menu and choose
Create Files for Window Controller.
This will generate your complete
header file for the class
you just created in Interface
Builder and a stub implementation
for the implementation side,
and put those files directly
into your Xcode project.
From Xcode, then,
you can begin changing them,
and then sync them back up with
Interface Builder any time you want.
This is a really neat tip
to get yourself started.
You drag those connections.
You don't have to worry so much about the
syntax because it will create it for you,
and then you get going.
So let's talk a little bit about
the Carbon-Cocoa interaction.
So in Tiger,
fully supported is any non-UI code.
So for instance,
you can call the spelling
checker directly from Carbon.
It'll be fully supported.
Modal panels in the other environment,
floating windows, palettes,
also fully supported in Tiger.
supported with caveats,
creating a Cocoa document-based
window from your Carbon application.
I remember reading on the
Carbon dev list a while ago that,
for instance,
window cycling didn't work quite right
when creating a Cocoa document-based
window inside of a Carbon application.
There are a few other minor
glitches like that that you can
find within the Windows menu,
and these are all issues
that we're addressing for
Leopard in Carbon right now.
Embedding an NSView within an HIView.
This works.
The goal is to be able to embed
any NSView within an HIView.
Actually, I should rephrase that.
Any NSView which draws on
its main thread in an HIView.
But this is a Leopard-only feature.
Sheets and drawers in Windows of
the other environment.
This is a feature which is planned
to be supported in Leopard,
but on the seed that you have right now,
I don't believe that
there's support for it.
So I'd like to quickly go
over some of the demos that
we included with this session.
I believe if you go to the
WWDC attendees area under session 129,
you can find all these demos and if not,
they should soon be available.
The first one is the
Carbon with Cocoa web window.
This is a Carbon application
which launches--
A web kit, web browser-based window,
Cocoa window,
from your Carbon-hosted application.
For this sample,
I included a step-by-step
tutorial of exactly what I did
in Xcode and exactly what I did
in Interface Builder to do this,
and a little bit of the thought
process that went into doing this
from the Carbon perspective again.
and then based on this sample,
I wrote two other samples.
One of them is the Carbon Quartz
Composer TV sample.
Again,
this is a Carbon-hosted application
which brings up a Cocoa-based
window and we have a complete Quartz
Composer composition in here which
has bindings running and everything.
It makes a pretty splashy demo.
I'll show it to you in a minute.
The next one is
Carbon Cocoa Core Image Tab.
This is again a Carbon application
and in the Cocoa side of this,
on the Cocoa window,
I made a tab-based web browser and then
I included some core image effects.
So when you switch from
one tab to the other,
we can use some core image effects
in here and this works back to Tiger.
It's really neat.
In fact, when I wrote this sample,
I was literally dragging people in
from the hall to show them because
it really makes that wow factor,
I think, that Bertrand was talking about.
Next one, like I mentioned,
we're asking developers to start
using NSCursor and because I mentioned
NSCursor in the presentation,
I wanted to include a sample
which shows exactly how to use
NSCursor from a Carbon-hosted
application and in the sample,
I actually write some
Carbon wrappers around NSCursor.
I shouldn't say I,
I should say we on this one.
So,
We have the HIView NSView.
This sample is a leopard-only sample,
and it shows how to embed
an NSView in an HIView.
So real quickly,
if we go over to the demo machine.
So I just want to real quickly show
off some of these samples here.
Here's the first one by which the
two other samples are based on,
the Carbon with Cocoa web window.
It's quite simple.
We have our Cocoa window here.
Excuse me, Carbon window on this side,
named Carbon window.
Cocoa window here.
And as you can see,
it's almost like a full web browser.
We can click in here.
Let me try and see if we can load .mac.
We'll load QuickTime.
All the links seem to work.
Backwards, forwards, and if you notice,
the URL and the title
also change with my links.
And I did all this with really very
little code because the WebKit view
is really a full-featured view,
which allows me to kind
of set up some bindings.
So without having to be
an expert at bindings,
I can set this up directly
from Interface Builder,
and it all just works.
So let's go ahead and take a look
at some of the other samples.
Here's that
Carbon Cocoa Core Image Tab sample
I was talking about.
Let me go ahead and set this one up.
Let me get something fun here.
Okay, so I have two,
that's not a real fun page,
but we have two websites here
and watch what happens when
I click between one and the other.
Here, let me slow that down a little
bit by holding down the shift key.
This is really easy to do.
You can just grab the source code,
integrate it right in there,
and I add a menu to do
different core image effects.
So, and this works in Tiger,
so it doesn't use any
of the core animations,
all core image.
And the Quartz Composer TV sample,
so we have our small Carbon window here,
we'll open up our Cocoa-based window.
The camera's starting.
Looks like the camera-- oh,
there it goes.
And it actually uses bindings.
So actually, if I change the title here,
it's all going to be live.
If you look at the orange title above,
we'll go ahead and put 2006 in there.
Hit Return, and it all updates live.
And lastly, we have the sample which
demonstrates how to embed an entire
NSView hierarchy within our HIView,
and that is in the HIView NSView sample.
And again,
the last sample that we have here
is the Carbon Cocoa Picture Cursor,
which just demonstrates how to set
the cursor through the NSCursor APIs.
If we go back over to slides.
So with that,
I'd like to welcome Scott Thompson,
talk about his experiences
bringing Mind Manager to the Mac.
All right.
Hello, how are you?
Thank you for having me.
I appreciate it.
My name is Scott Thompson.
I'm the lead architect for
cross-platform products at Mindjet.
And I'm sure some of you are
wondering why is Scott here.
You heard Deric speaking about the
fact that I work on an application
that used to be a Windows application,
but why would I be here
for a Carbon session?
Well, in a previous life,
I was known as the Macintosh technical
lead for Macromedia Freehand.
And Freehand was one of the
very first applications ever
ported to Carbon and moved to
Mac OS X through the Carbon APIs.
Freehand is a very large application.
It took us a lot of work to do it.
And the last time I was on this stage,
I was actually demoing
it in the WWDC keynote.
Now I work at Mindjet,
and we work on a program
called Mind Manager.
Mind Manager is a legacy
Windows application that we've
moved to Mac OS X using Cocoa,
but our development team was
actually peopled with people
that were Carbon developers.
One of us had done some Cocoa.
But we'll talk about that,
and I'm here to tell you
about my experiences.
That's a very black slide.
Ah, I pushed the wrong button.
It doesn't work.
All right, so what is my purpose here?
Well,
we're going to explore the case study
of MindManager and what we did to
make MindManager work on the Mac.
We're going to discuss some of
the architectural decisions that
we made in doing that as a large
cross-platform application.
How does that fit into
the Cocoa universe?
And how do Carbon Developers do that?
We're going to offer advice
from Carbon Developers
who've been there before.
We've made the transition
from Carbon to Cocoa.
Maybe we can give you some
hints to help you along the way,
offer you signposts to put
your feet on the best path to
bringing your code forward.
What will happen if I'm successful?
Well, hopefully I'll answer some
of the questions that you
might have about Cocoa.
I'll help you visualize how Cocoa can
fit into your development plans,
maybe steer you away from a couple of
the pitfalls that we fell into so you
don't have to wallow in the mire with us.
And if I inspire you
to try Cocoa at home,
then I'll have done my job admirably.
Thank you.
So let's talk about MindManager.
What is MindManager?
MindManager is a productivity
application for information management.
It's designed to help you capture, share,
and collect your ideas and organize them.
MindManager is Mindjet's
flagship product.
It has a nine-year history of
development on the Windows platform.
By the time we started the project,
it was approximately one and a half
million lines of Windows and MFC code,
all of it written, of course, in C++.
The first thing we learned
was that MindManager was
already mostly MVC-factored.
They've done a very good job
of separating their core code
away from their user interface,
and we'll see some of
the implications of that.
Now,
this is not a MindManager sales pitch.
If you're interested in
learning more about MindManager,
you can go to www.mapthemac.com
or catch me around the sessions,
and I'd be happy to show you MindManager.
One thing to note about MindManager,
it helps you capture ideas.
Developers typically have a lot of ideas.
We found it to be a very
handy development tool.
All right, the project,
what we had to do.
The idea was, of course,
we wanted to create a Macintosh
version of MindManager.
The reason we wanted to do that is
because MindJet had had a lot of
feedback from MindManager customers,
and they wanted to bring, you know,
they noticed a good synergy between
the sort of things that MindManager
does and the sort of creative
people you find on the Mac.
So there was already
high customer demand.
And after we came up with our first beta,
we got a lot of comments
from users that said,
"Oh my God, finally,
I can finally get rid of that
Windows laptop I've been keeping around
just to run MindManager." So we had two
big goals as we started the project.
We wanted to make sure that
we were making an application
that was MindManager.
We didn't want it to
look something bizarre.
And we want to make sure that
it was a Macintosh application,
not a badly ported Windows application.
So I'm sure you've all seen those.
We wanted to make sure that
you didn't see another one.
The total time that we had to do
the project for the first release
was approximately 18 months.
The team that we had,
starting with Mindjet, was we had Larry.
Larry had absolutely no
Mac experience whatsoever,
but he was our tie to the past.
He'd been working on
Mind Manager for a long time.
Then there's me.
I'd done mostly Carbon programming
on big Carbon applications.
I was a Cocoa hobbyist.
I'd pulled out and done some
tutorials and those sorts of things.
We had Jeff.
Jeff, as well,
was largely a Carbon programmer
who hadn't done much with Cocoa.
We brought in Glenn.
Glenn was our Cocoa ringer.
He'd actually had five years
of professional development
experience using Cocoa.
Then we had Eric, Jim, and Paul,
who were three contract engineers.
They helped us out.
It was sort of a mixed bag.
Some of them had some more
Cocoa experience than others,
but by and large,
we were a Carbon team trying
to move into a Cocoa world.
The timeline for our project
ended up breaking out this way.
We spent the first five months
doing sort of strategy and setup.
We had a large application to move over,
so we had to nail down exactly which
features we were going to bring over,
which ones we weren't going to be able
to bring over for technical reasons
or time reasons and all those things.
We also spent the first five
months getting some of the
low-level libraries to rebuild,
things like the XML layer and encryption,
and we have some code to
handle zip archives and things.
So the actual application
development took about 12 months.
So from the time we actually
started writing Cocoa code and
designing the user interface,
it took about a year,
and we shipped in May 31, 2006.
So essentially,
we built a Cocoa application,
a fully-featured Macintosh application,
in about 12 months using some of the
help that we had from the Windows code.
So a big part of our success was
based on our application strategy.
And our application strategy in term
is based on Model-View-Controller.
The first thing that we did, though,
was we noticed that we were going to have
what we call a core and edge structure.
So core is the platform-independent code.
That's the C++ code that's shared with
Windows and those sorts of things.
The edge code would be the
platform-dependent code,
so any of the code that you
use to do the user interface.
What we decided for our application
strategy was we were going
to use the existing C++ data
model that Mindjet already had.
They had put a lot of work into
developing their data model,
getting it ready.
We were also going to use a lot of the
existing commands and notifications,
those portions of the controller layer
that knew how to manipulate the model.
We're going to keep up with those.
Of course, we decided,
being Carbon programmers,
that the Macintosh edge code
would all be done in Cocoa.
So when you do something like this,
the place where things get
really exciting is at the
interfaces between layers.
I mean, that's where, you know,
if you think about it,
we've got lots of idioms
that go along that way.
We have where the rubber meets the road,
between a rock and a hard place,
those sorts of things.
So we spend a lot of our times in
those kinds of nooks and crannies.
Some that we ran into in particular were,
of course, the user interface versus
the business logic.
We couldn't reuse a lot of the
user interface controller layer
from the Windows side because we
didn't want our application to
look like a Windows application.
We wanted to do a Mac application,
so we needed new Macintosh-specific
code for that sort of thing.
Platform-dependent code versus
platform-independent code was
another interesting transition layer.
And along with the
platform-dependent and independent,
we also had the C++ versus
Objective-C transitions to deal with.
So the way that we did this
was we relied heavily on the
Model-View-Controller model.
Now, Deric, you're bound to have run
into Model-View-Controller at
many places up to this point,
and it was a really valuable tool for
us because we knew we wanted the view
side of things to be in Objective-C.
We knew we wanted the C++
side of things to be in C++,
but the question is, what do you do about
that controller layer?
I mean,
how do you deal with the controller?
Well, the way that we dealt with it in
our application was we took the
controller layer and we split it,
not necessarily right down the middle,
but into two pieces.
So if you view the controller layer,
one side of it as,
how does the user interact with my data?
What sort of gestures
are they going to use?
What sort of things is
the user going to do?
And you look at the other
side of the controller as,
what commands am I going to
send to my model to actually
make changes to my model?
Then this split makes a lot more sense.
Now, as it turns out,
it also happens to correspond
with some of these interfaces
we've been talking about.
This entire side of the diagram was what
we were going to write in Objective-C,
or in this case,
we actually used Objective-C++ because
Objective-C++ can talk directly to C++.
The other side of the diagram, of course,
was going to be the C++ legacy code
that we inherited from Mindjet,
and that's how we were going
to manipulate our model and do
serialization and those sorts of things.
So it also corresponds roughly
to the platform independent
and platform dependent.
Transition layers as well.
So by and large,
the view side and the controllers
that went into the view side were
all platform-dependent code dealing
with the Macintosh user interface.
And as we mentioned,
we've got the legacy code
that's shared with Windows for
the platform-independent side.
So we had to touch Objective-C,
and I know that that's a sort of
a large issue for a lot of people.
It causes lots of consternation on the
development list and things like that.
It is true that
Objective-C does look different.
There are square brackets.
They end up in your code,
and you're like, eh, what's up with that?
But that sort of,
the oddness of it goes away very quickly.
There's a whole lot more to learn
about Objective-C than just the syntax.
The syntax is the smallest part of it.
You also have to learn about how
objects are created and released.
You have to learn how methods
are dispatched and those things.
But once you've learned those things,
you can apply them to so
much more than just Cocoa.
So the sort of canonical
example of this is Core Image.
If you wish to use Core Image from
inside of a Carbon application,
you have to go through
the Objective-C API.
But in this case,
Core Image is not part of Cocoa.
Core Image is part of
that Core Services layer.
And, of course, this week I learned with
you about Core Animation.
Which is also down sort of
in the Core Services layer.
It's an Objective-C API,
but it's not necessarily a Cocoa service.
The final thing I want to mention
about Objective-C is that it
does have some advantages.
There are reasons that
Apple uses Objective-C,
and it takes you a little while to
recognize some of those reasons.
But once you get it,
once you understand why they're
doing what they're doing,
it makes it a whole
lot easier to swallow.
So let's talk a little
bit about Objective-C++.
I mentioned that most of our
platform dependent code was
written in Objective-C++.
As Deric mentioned,
it allows you to combine C++
and Objective-C in the same
file or often in the same line.
If you want to call an
Objective-C method and you have
to make a C++ call in the middle,
you can just call it
normally as you would.
It brings some familiar C++
features that I happen to like.
I like strong typing.
I like the ability to
declare variables anywhere.
I know some people don't like that,
but I find it very handy.
And when you're doing this,
your Objective-C++ controllers become
these islands of information exchange.
What I mean by that is if your core code,
if the model has some sort of
notification that it needs to
send back to the user interface,
it's going to have to make one of these
transitions from C++ to Objective-C.
What it can do is sort of hop
off of one of your controllers,
send it to your controller,
and your controller can rebroadcast the
notification as an Objective-C message.
Or you can go back the other way.
If the user clicks on a
button in your user interface,
that Objective-C message
will go to the controller,
which is an Objective-C++,
and it in turn can call a C++ method.
Finally,
using Objective-C++ is very easy,
as Deric pointed out.
We use .mm files for
all of our controllers,
but occasionally we have to go in
and actually mark one of our C++
files is needing Objective C++.
[Transcript missing]
So let's talk about Cocoa itself.
Cocoa contains some really great
frameworks and this plays into the idea
that Deric kept mentioning that it brings
a lot of functionality together for you,
you know, for free.
The user experience for us
came together very quickly.
We didn't have to do a whole lot to,
you know,
get standard buttons working and all
that kind of code wired up to our code.
So you get lots of standard behavior
for free and another interesting
thing to note is that we didn't
have to use all of Cocoa and Deric
mentioned that Cocoa is not a box.
It's not going to lock you in.
As it turned out,
because we were using the C++ code to
handle the commands to the data model,
the way that Cocoa handles
undo and redo through the
Objective-C dynamic dispatching was
sort of very inconvenient for us.
So we simply, you know,
rerouted those menu items to our
C++ code and went out from there.
And as Deric mentioned,
Cocoa is actually really
great as a prototyping tool.
It allows you to wire together a
user interface quickly and your
UI designers will really like that.
So you can take the boy out of Carbon,
but you can't necessarily take
the Carbon out of the boy.
One effective strategy that
we used was to actually drop
at certain levels in our code.
We actually avoided a C++
to Objective-C transition
where it wasn't necessary.
So, for example,
we had the Windows-based file
classes that we wanted to reproduce.
And we wanted to sort of keep
some of the same behaviors there.
So rather than calling back out to, say,
NSFileManager or NSFileHandle
or something like that,
we just basically picked up the
old Carbon File Manager routines,
which are actually, I think they're now
part of core services,
and called those.
Similarly,
when we were doing our graphics drawing,
we'd get to a certain point in the
code and we wanted to have the exact
same C++ code driving the rendering in
the same order so that things didn't
look different between the Mac and
the Windows inside of documents.
Rather than making a transition
back out to Cocoa and actually using
NSBezierPath and those classes,
we actually jumped straight
to the Quartz 2DC interfaces.
We used Core Foundation an awful lot.
And Core Foundation becomes this
really nice transport mechanism for
moving information from the C++ side
to the Objective-C side because of the
toll-free bridging that Derek mentioned.
If we had some C++ code that
needed to return an array,
we could just package it up in a CFArray.
Pass it across the boundary and typecast
it to an NSArray and away you go.
So let's talk a little bit about
getting started from my perspective.
As Deric already mentioned,
the first thing is to realize that
you already know a lot about Carbon,
about Cocoa development.
You already know a lot about
Carbon development too.
You know,
application bundles aren't going away
and they're the same on either platform.
Lots of application functionality is
down inside those core application
services layer and you may already
be familiar with a lot of it.
Aqua hasn't changed,
so all the work you put
into user interface design,
you might have to redo the nib file,
but you don't have to relay out your
controls and and all that kind of stuff.
Capture the basics first.
So start with some of
the simple tutorials.
There's an awful lot of stuff
in Cocoa and Cocoa related.
The key value coding,
the key value observing, bindings.
These are very exciting technologies,
but you sort of have to get in the
right mindset before you can really
pick them up and use them effectively.
So start with some simple tutorials.
And begin with a good
grounding in the basics.
So some of the basics
you'll want to know.
You'll want to know about some
of the idioms that Cocoa and
Objective-C use because they're
patterns that are a little bit
different than the way C++ does things.
In particular,
these are just some examples.
The object life cycle,
the way that objects are
constructed and destroyed,
the way you get into the middle
of that process and interject your
own code into the initializers is
different in Cocoa and Objective-C.
Mutable versus immutable.
Mutable objects are used pervasively
throughout the Cocoa frameworks.
You may already be familiar
with some of this from the core
foundation work you've already done,
but it takes on a sort of a whole
new meaning in the Cocoa world.
Derek mentioned the delegation
instead of subclassing.
One of the things that I always
like to point out to people is that
once you've learned these things,
they don't exist in a vacuum.
You're adding tools to your toolbox.
I found places where I could take
something I learned from the Cocoa side
of things and apply it in the C++ code.
So, you know,
if you get really bogged down and, "Oh,
I hate to have to learn this stuff,"
just realize that you're still learning.
So that's always,
there's something to be said for that.
As Derek mentioned, you can start using
Objective-C from your Carbon app.
Core image is one of my
favorite tinker toys.
I imagine that core animation
would be one if it was around
before I started this slide.
Those are examples of
Objective-C APIs you can make
calls to from inside of Carbon.
app, and Derek provided you
with some samples as well.
One of the most interesting things about
Objective-C is this idea that you can
send a message to any object at runtime,
and the object will decide whether or not
it wants to actually handle that message.
Much of the Cocoa magic is based on this,
and it does take a little
while to get your brain around
to working in that mode.
I have a little bullet point here.
The implications of late
binding are pervasive,
but not immediately obvious.
The reason for this is that you'll find
that as you're going through your code,
you'll run into this brick
wall and you're like,
"How does this happen?
How is this code getting invoked?"
Whenever you hit one of these roadblocks,
look and see if there's some dynamic
method dispatching going on that
you weren't previously aware of.
If you hit a roadblock,
look for it to see if you can
find out how to get around it
through the magic of Objective-C.
[Transcript missing]
So I wanted to end with a quote,
and this is a quote that
one of our developers,
Jeff Lynch,
heard when he was at the Big Nerd Ranch.
And it's, when you find yourself
working with Cocoa,
if you find that you're writing
a lot of code to implement
some basic functionality,
you're probably doing it wrong.
Now, it's kind of a flippant maxim,
but it was something that
proved to be true for us
repeatedly in our development.
We'd find we were writing a lot of code,
trying to get something done,
and if we had just taken another
five minutes and stepped back and
read some of the documentation,
we found that it was
already there for us.
So that's all I have,
and I'll turn it back over to
Deric to help you wrap it up.
Thanks, Scott.
Here's my email address.
You can all email me.
In summary, a few things I'd like
you to take away is that,
first,
you don't have to start from scratch.
Objective-C and C++ play nicely together.
The framework does a
whole lot of work for you,
so you don't have to do it.
And this stuff really is fun.
Everybody that starts
writing Cocoa applications,
you get a whole lot of
action with very little code.
So with that, as Scott mentioned,
list.apple.com is a moderated
list with over 4,000 members.
If you want to go for the
entire Cocoa immersion,
I highly recommend the Big Nerd Ranch.
You spend a week out there
thinking nothing but Cocoa.
Aaron Hilligast also has a book,
Cocoa Programming for Mac OS X.
And there's also a website,
Cocoa Dev Central,
which provides a whole lot of tutorials.
So as you start to learn Cocoa,
you want to learn more
about bindings or something,
go to Cocoa Dev Central,
and they provide tutorials.